Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops.
And today I'm joined by Doctor Nicola Rayani. She
is Professor of Evolution and Behavior at Univer at University
College London. Her research considers the evolution of cooper
operation in nature. She was elected Fellow of the
Royal Society of Biology in 2019. And we're going
to talk today about her first book, The Social
Instinct How co-operation Shaped the world. So Nicola,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone
. Thanks very much for the invite. And uh
yeah, I've been looking forward to joining you.
OK, great. So let me first ask you
since this is a book basically about uh our societies
evolved about sociality. Why do you begin the book
by going all the way down to the cellular level
? Well, I think it's kind of interesting to
start there because the book has the book has a
very obvious structure. So it starts very small,
thinking about co-operation that uh happens inside the bodies of
multicellular organisms. And then it in each part of
the book, I zoom out a level and think
about the evolution of families and then the evolution of
co-operation beyond the family group. And finally, in
the last part of the book, I talk about
the evolution of societies and large scale co-operation. Um
The reason that I wanted to have that structure is
that I think um for people who maybe don't know
a lot about cooper operation or who haven't, you
know, studied it in much detail. It would
be quite easy to assume that cooper operation was just
something that happens between individuals. So it's some kind
of behavior that you see individuals doing and that's observable
in some way in the real world. Uh And
I don't think it's as widely appreciated that actually every
multicellular being on earth, every living multicellular organism,
whether it's a plant or an animal or, or
a fungi is actually created through co-operation and it's created
through genes cooperating with one another and cells cooperating with
one another to um form this collective that we call
an organism or an individual. And the reason that
I wanted to uh have this structure and to think
about this sort of this, this cooper operation at
these, the lowest levels if you like at the
lowest levels of organization is because it helps, it
helps us to realize as we move through the book
, these very general principles that underpin co-operation at all
levels of life, whether we're talking about genes cooperating
inside bodies or ants cooperating inside a a colony or
people cooperating inside a society. There are some kind
of fundamental general principles that emerge at all these levels
of life. And that's why I wanted to start
with this perspective of the understanding the individual as a
feat of cooper operation. Um to try to bring
out those commonalities and to surprise people in a way
, right? And why do you decide to focus
on cooper operation? Because for example, we could
also have focused on competition. So why cooper?
Well, for me, co-operation and competition are two
sides of the same coin. Um So in,
I think one of the big misunderstandings in some ways
about the selfish gene, the book by Richard Dawkins
, which is 45 years old now is that it
predicts is that selfish genes would predict selfish behavior and
that we would only find selfish genes inside the bodies
of the most selfish or uh nefarious individuals. And
in fact that has been that is a misconception and
continues to be a misconception of what that gene eye's
view perspective of evolution is about. And Dawkins himself
noted in his book that in many ways, the
most effective ways for a gene to ensure that copies
of itself find their way into future generations is to
co-operate. And through this lens, we can see
that co-operation is often a selfish or a self interested
strategy. And so for me, I see focusing
on co-operation is in some ways, it just depends
how you want to view it, you can view
cooper operation as being a form of competition if you
like, even though people don't often think of it
that way. So I wouldn't necessarily say that my
book is only about cooper operation. It's about how
cooper operation is often an effective way to compete or
to prosper. So when trying to understand the evolution
of human co-operation, what would be the best uh
models? I mean, in terms of other species
to, to which we should compare humans? I
mean, would it be the most closely related to
us, the other great apes or others? So
I think this is a really interesting question and this
is one, this kind of question is one that's
actually underwritten lots of my own academic research because many
of the species that I've worked on outside of my
research on humans have been species that not only are
not very closely related to us on the tree of
life, but they're species that people probably have never
even heard of. So things like a pied babbler
, which is a bird that lives in family groups
in, in the Kalahari desert or the cleaner fish
, which is a fish that lives on coral reefs
in the in throughout the Indo Pacific. And one
of the general um underlying themes of the research that
I've done when I've compared the behavior of nonhuman species
with what we see in humans and in particular,
the social behavior and the co-operative behavior is that often
we can find striking similarities in the kinds of behavioral
outcomes that are achieved by humans and by quite distantly
related species like meerkats and hide babblers and cleaner fish
. Even though we don't, we're not closely related
to these species. Uh And one of the key
points in some ways is this idea that often we
might get to the same behavioral destination as another species
. So to give an example, one of the
behaviors that humans are famous for is teaching and we
tend to think of teaching as being, you know
, a quintessentially human activity. Um And when we
, when people started looking for examples of teaching in
the animal world, in the nonhuman world, they
instinctively looked for it first in species like chimpanzees and
gorillas and the other great apes. But we didn't
find those examples of teaching in those species. And
in fact, the first species where we found an
example of teaching was an ant. And the second
example was a meerkat. And so, and the
third example actually was a work that I did,
which was on pied babblers. One of the really
interesting things. And one of the main messages in
my book is that often we can find that humans
and nonhuman species can get to the same behavioral destination
. So we see these commonalities, for example,
in the fact that we teach, but so do
meerkats and so do ants and so do pried babblers
, but we get there via a quite different cognitive
journey to these other species. And so the kind
of cognition that supports teaching in humans probably involves the
ability to understand what a pupil knows some kind of
mind reading or what psychologists call theory of mind.
Whereas in species like ants and babblers and meerkats,
we don't think there's that sort of cognition is happening
at all to facilitate teaching. And instead the teaching
behavior is achieved by our different cognitive route. And
so I think often we can find similarities in the
behavior we observe between humans and other species in the
behavioral outcomes. And we ought to look for similarities
and behavioral outcomes where the ecology is likely to favor
those kinds of behaviors. And that won't always be
in our closest living relatives that won't always be in
species like the chimpanzees and the other great apes.
But even when we do find those behavioral similarities,
what we then also have to ask is, well
, how does the cognition supporting those behaviors differ?
And that's really where I think we start to see
points of divergence between humans and other species, which
is not so much what we do. But it's
a, it's about how we do it and it's
about how we get there cognitively. So when talking
about the evolution of co-operation, particularly with evolutionary biologists
, people bring to the table evolved mechanisms like kin
selection, reciprocal altruism group selection even so Uh I
I mean, do you think that any one of
these is uh enough to explain the evolution of co-operation
or should we unders try to understand different aspects of
co-operation uh how they evolve via one of these evolved
mechanisms? And I mean, particularly group selection because
that's a very controversial topic among evolutionary biologists. I
mean, what do you think about it? So
I think there is this sort of pervasive assumption in
a lot of the human evolution literature that the two
key mechanisms that support co-operation are either kin selection,
meaning just that you help your relatives because you share
copies of their genes. And that's another way to
get copies of your genes into the next generation or
it's reciprocal altruism. And there is a kind of
, there has been at least an assumption in the
literature that if you can't explain co-operation, either with
kin selection or with reciprocal altruism, then we should
, then we should bring in group selection as the
alternative explanation. And I don't, I don't fully
subscribe to that view. So I think that kin
selection is probably the most important mechanism for explaining the
breadth of co-operation that we see on earth. So
most of the co-operation we see in um humans but
also in nonhuman species occurs within the confines of family
groups. And there is no coincidence that we see
co-operation in families because there's just a much bigger incentive
to help individuals who share copies of the, the
same genes that you have. And so if you
were going to say which which of these evolutionary mechanisms
has the most potential for explaining most cases of co-operation
that we see on earth. I think in selection
probably explains most of the examples we see particularly in
nonhuman species. But when we look at between unrelated
individuals where we know that kin selection can't be at
work. I think it's very short sighted to assume
that the only other mechanism at our disposal to explain
this co-operation is reciprocal altruism. And we know that
there are many, many mechanisms that can support co-operation
between non relatives, um things like punishment and um
reputation based partner of choice or concern for reputation.
And so I don't think we necessarily have to reflexively
decide that it's either con selection or it's reciprocal altruism
or else let's bring in group selection. Um So
I think there are multiple mechanisms that are really important
for understanding how co-operation evolves. Um Interdependence is arguably
even more important than reciprocal altruism in a lot of
cases where individuals have a stake in one another's fitness
. And so they're incentivized to help their interaction partners
, even if there's no uh no scope for repayment
from those partners. I think now we there are
lots of mechanisms we know about that can support cooper
operation and group selection is just one of those and
arguably the least parsimonious given what we know about how
evolution works and what are families from an evolutionary perspective
? So a family, I think a family is
a special kind of social group. So it's a
stable social group, um obviously usually comprised of genealogical
relatives. Um In our own case, I think
we tend to think of families as being nuclear families
, mum, dad and the kids. Um but
in fact, nuclear families are a bit of an
outlier for in, in nature, but also in
our own species. The nuclear family is a bit
of an outlier when you consider our long history on
this planet. And also if you think outside of
the western model of society and look more broadly at
other cultures, the western model of the nuclear family
is really quite unusual and where we see family life
in humans, but also in other species, which
are often called co-operative breeders, family tends to be
based on a more extended notion of family. So
you often have um a breeding pair or the mother
and father and then several other individuals, relatives who
might live in the same stable social group and might
all contribute to raising offspring within that group. So
since you mentioned the nuclear family, and because this
ties back to questions that people nowadays are discussing particularly
in politics about the role that the nuclear family plays
and how important it is. I mean, since
we have such high degrees of cooper breathing, particularly
looking cross culturally and back in time, I mean
, uh I is it really that important for Children
to have at home, both a mother and a
father or, I mean, is it at least
one of them essential or could, can they be
replaced by other people or other? I mean,
family and perhaps friends and perhaps even in the case
of, of modern societies, other people from certain
institutions. So I think this is one question which
has been massively thrown into sharp relief by the pandemic
that we're currently experiencing. And for anyone like me
who has, who lives in a western nuclear family
, where you have a mum and dad and Children
at home, the experience of having school closures and
the usual um sources of help, the way that
we outsource our childcare to these institutionalized um forms of
childcare has really exposed just how dependent we are on
help to in order to be able to successfully raise
offspring. And I think this is a, there
is a more general point here like you said,
which is that there is an ideology and it is
an ideology in the West that the mother is the
, she ought to be the exclusive caregiver for her
offspring and is the irreplaceable caregiver for her offspring.
And that if a mother, for example, outsources
that childcare by sending her child to nursery when they're
too young or, or outsourcing it to other forms
of, of institutionalized child, then she might be
wreaking some kind of emotional damage or harm onto her
child. And I think that that view is pernicious
, not just because it enforces a patriarchal norm of
women staying at home to look after Children and,
and, and these things, but because it actually
has no bearing on what we know about the reality
of how humans evolved, which is that we evolved
in extended family groups where Children would have been raised
by many, many different individuals and not just by
the mother. And often not even the mother would
not even have been necessarily the primary caregiver. Um
For a lot of the time Children would have been
raised by their older siblings, by their grandparents,
by various other adults in around aunts, uncles and
so on. Um And this idea that Children need
to form this bond with one individual in order to
develop a secure attachment and that if that is somehow
disrupted, that the child will go on to have
emotional and behavioral problems, really has no empirical support
. And also is just not in keeping with our
view of with our, our understanding of how humans
evolved. And the fact that Children have always grown
up being looked after by multiple different caregivers. Um
And the reason we probably don't, we have the
, we're able to have these nuclear families or we're
able to persist in these nuclear families in the West
is that we outsource that childcare nowadays to these various
institutions. And that's how, you know, that's
we out, we send our Children to school,
you know, things like this. So I think
it's in some ways, one of the messages in
the book that I write in in the chapter on
childcare is that the an evolutionary perspective would suggest that
it's completely fine to send your Children to daycare.
That's a, a very normal situation for a young
human child to be immersed in, to be surrounded
by other Children and to be looked after by multiple
different caregivers, not just the mother. So another
question since we have so much cooperating co-operative breeding in
humans and in the case of men, uh we
have paternity, uncertainty. Why is it that paternal
investment in humans evolved? I mean, I I'm
asking you that also because many times people say,
and I'm not completely sure if this is true that
in comparing to other species, human males are sort
of outliers in how much they invest in their Children
. So you're right that humans are a bit unusual
as far as mammals go in, that males are
involved often in helping to raise the offspring. That's
not a human, that's not a universal. So
there is some cross cultural variation in how involved fathers
are with raising their offspring and sometimes sometimes fathers aren't
really involved at all. There are some societies like
the Da Toga in Tanzania where men are really not
involved at all in raising their offspring. And there
are other societies um like for example, the,
the matrilineal society called the um Mosi society in China
, where men actually have much more to do with
their sister's Children than they do with their own Children
. So they're much more involved in raising their nieces
and nephews than they are in raising their own um
offspring. So it's not a hu it's not a
universal, but there is a general pattern that,
that human males are typically more involved in raising offspring
than the average male mammal is. Um and you
mentioned paternity uncertainty. And I think for humans actually
, as far as uh again in relation to other
mammal species, paternity uncertainty for humans is typically relatively
low. So our best evidence, even though it's
very difficult to be certain, indicates that humans probably
evolved um to uh uh to be socially and sexually
monogamous females probably weren't mating with multiple males at the
same time. And we can infer this based on
looking at things like relative, the size of the
testicles relative to the body size in humans and other
ape species. The idea being that if females are
what we call promiscuous in that they mate with multiple
males, um during a single Easter cycle, males
ought to grow bigger balls because they need to produce
more sperm to be able to compete in sperm competition
with other males. Human males, uh their rela
their testy size relative to their body size is much
closer to what we would expect. Um if humans
mating system as ancestrally was more at the monogamous end
of the scale. And that implies that a relatively
high degree of paternity certainty in humans compared to something
like a chimpanzee, where females are much more promiscuous
and do mate with many males in the group um
within a single Easter cycle. Uh And so,
I think, um in part, we can understand
this evolution of paternal care through this, through there
being an increased certainty for human males that, that
, that Children that they raise with their um opposite
sex partner are theirs. Um And also the fact
that humans evolved in much more difficult environments than the
environments that are characterized by, by the great apes
that are alive today. And mothers really needed help
in the production of young, they needed help from
fathers and other family members if they were going to
be able to successfully raise young. And that's another
really important reason why we see paternal investment in humans
and not so much in the other great ape species
where mothers are much more able to raise offspring without
assistance from other individuals. Mhm. So I've already
talked several times about grandmothers on the show. So
I would like to ask you specifically about this since
as far as we know, it was women who
tended to move to their husband's household when they married
. I mean, why is it that it is
maternal grandmothers that tend to invest more in their grandchildren
than paternal grandmothers and not the other way around considering
that then the Children would be living in their father's
household. Yeah, that's, that's a really interesting
question. And it's one that when, when I
first started to learn about these uh reproductive conflicts that
prompted the evolution of menopause. That was a question
that I also had as well because in some ways
, you, your default assumption is that the younger
female has moved to live with the husband's uh family
. And so the nearest available grandmother to help is
gonna be the paternal grandmother. So why isn't she
, why are paternal grandmothers less decisive for the survival
of offspring and for the fecundity of females than maternal
grandmothers? Um And it I asked Mike Can about
this. He is the guy who he's one of
the evolutionary biologists who has been very heavily involved in
developing the theoretical models on the evolution of menopause.
And he, his, he, his view was
that the model is correct. We fe we do
see female bias dispersal such that females are moving to
live with their husband's family and they're in closer proximity
to their mother-in-law than they are to their own mother
. But as long as they don't move too far
away, as long as that dispersal distance isn't too
far, then the maternal grandmother can still can still
manage to help her daughter um in rai with raising
offspring and anything that that entails. And so I
think in my mind, at least I'd kind of
always assumed that this dispersal was happening over a really
vast distance. And so, you know, you're
leaving home and that's it, you're never gonna see
them again. But I think probably the dis the
distances that we're talking about are not as prohibitive for
allowing maternal grandmothers to still be involved in helping their
daughters to raise young. And in fact, there
are some data showing that when the distance moved by
the younger female is far enough such that their,
their mother can no longer help, then they,
they actually experience reduced bund and reduced survival of their
offspring because they don't have that assistance from their own
mothers in producing young. Yeah, it's interesting.
I also have that idea that when they moved,
it was so far away that perhaps maternal grandmothers wouldn't
be able to help there. And I was even
asking myself if we could talk about male fill of
pater in humans, but perhaps not. I think
we don't, I think basically, uh I'm not
an expert in this but the, as far as
we know, um I think our best estimates are
that dispersal in ancestral human populations was female biased.
And so, and I think the, the models
of the evolution of menopause and the reproductive conflicts and
how those are resolved through relatedness, asymmetries between uh
the paternal mother in law, the paternal grandmother and
the younger female makes sense under this framework of female
biased dispersal. So I think that, um I
guess, I don't know, maybe new data will
come and things will be overturned. But my,
I, at the moment, I sort of accept
this consensus that the dispersal in ancestral human populations was
female biased. Right. So, I mean,
but, but in the case of grandfathers, do
they play any role whatsoever? Why is it that
men have also such long lifespans on average? So
there's um an evolutionary demographer called Rebecca Seer, who's
done lots of work on um who keeps Children alive
. That's the title of one of her papers who
keeps Children alive and based on meta analysis of lots
of different studies, um as you might expect the
most important person for keeping Children alive in the first
years of life is the mother, fathers have a
much less decisive role to play in the survival of
their offspring. The presence of a maternal grandmother often
has a positive effect, but the presence of grandfathers
is really not decisive at all for keeping Children alive
. And so the inference um from these, from
these studies is that grandfathers aren't really doing that much
. Um at least in these um in these studies
for which we have data, grandfathers aren't doing that
much to keep their grandchildren alive, to improve the
survival of their, of their grandchildren. And so
yes, there is a, a question of why
do you know, why do men get to then
have this extended lifespan? And I think one of
the most obvious answers that I've seen uh that makes
sense is that a man can still continue to accrue
reproductive success quite late into his life. Um And
without a substantial amount of investment, unlike, unlike
women who have to, you know, get pregnant
and just stay a baby and then um lactate after
the baby is born, the investment involved for a
male is much, much less. And so it
could, it can simply be like these opportunities to
continue to accrue reproductive success, can help to select
um for a long lifespan in men as well as
in women. Mhm. So moving from families,
why is it that it is so common from for
humans to help others they are unrelated to? So
, yeah, I mean, this is a really
big question and I guess whenever we ask a why
question in evolutionary biology, we have to always recognize
that there are two different, broadly speaking, two
different kinds of explanation that we could offer. So
, on the one hand, we can offer what
we call proximate level explanations and they're simply concerned with
how the behavior comes about what the motives are or
the maybe the physiological mechanisms that bring that behavior about
. And we can also ask um what we call
um Well, sorry, we can also provide what
we call ultimate level explanations. And those are more
concerned with the evolutionary significance of the behavior. And
so when we ask why humans help strangers, if
we were to offer proximate level explanations, we might
be in the realm of thinking about things like warm
glow, it feels good to help other people,
or maybe we have a norm, psychology. And
in the society that we live in, there's a
norm which dictates that you ought to help, you
know, help people if you can, even if
you don't know them. Um There, there are
a bunch of um proximate level explanations that you could
offer to explain why people might help others. And
I really don't think it's as simple as saying,
here's the reason there are, there are maybe,
I don't know 25 or 30 different kinds of proximate
level explanation. Maybe more that you could offer to
, to, to that in answer to that question
. If you want to give an ultimate level explanation
of why people help. Well, broadly speaking,
we would say that um the tendency to help other
individuals, if it has any genetic basis would be
under positive selection if it increases the individual's inclusive fitness
. So if it, if it generates some benefits
in terms of survival or reproductive success, and there
are a few evolutionary routes by which that could be
achieved, for example, um if you help other
individuals, you might improve your reputation and then you
might then improve your standing or your social position,
you might be more likely to get helped, um
, by other people when you need it. Given
that you have a reputation for being a helpful person
who is normally doing the right thing for others,
you might um, avoid being punished by other people
if you, if you help in certain scenarios or
if you don't defect in certain scenarios. Um,
there again, just like with the proximate level of
answers, there are, there are multiple different routes
by which a tendency to help others could, could
be reconciled with benefits at the individual level. And
you could see how it could be under positive selection
. Mhm. So if one of people's concerns is
their reputation, what about when they perform good deeds
that are hidden from others? I mean, what
do, why do we do that? And what
do we have to gain from it? So,
one of the really important things to bear in mind
when we're thinking about things like why does a human
, why do people help other people? Like I
said, one, we can think about these two
different kinds of explanation which we call proximate and ultimate
. And often people don't often have to be aware
of the ultimate level um of the ultimate function of
the behavior for the behavior to be under positive selection
. And so, um if we take a completely
different example, just because sometimes it's easier to think
about something that's slightly different. If you were to
say why do people have sex? Well, on
a proximate level, people have sex because they find
it, um, you know, they enjoy it
or they desire to have it or they find,
you know, they find it subjectively rewarding. The
ultimate reason sex exists and the ultimate function of sex
is, or at least one ultimate function is to
produce offspring. It's a pretty direct means to increase
reproductive success. That doesn't mean that every time we
have sex we're kind of thinking about, I'm gonna
get reproductive success. Now, like people, the
proximate and the ultimate reasons why behavior exists can be
completely separate. And often in our mind, we're
not even aware of the ultimate reason why we do
something. And so if you say something like why
do people give anonymously well for many people helping others
or donating to charity or giving in an anonymous way
feels very subjectively rewarding. It's a phenomenon that economists
have called the warm glow of giving. And it
, you know, makes you feel all fuzzy and
nice inside to know that you've helped somebody. Um
And that fuzzy warm feeling is evolution's way of getting
you to do something that on average is in your
long term interest that on average might be expected to
result in reputation benefits or any other host of benefits
that might occur because of you performing a helpful action
. And if, if occasionally that doesn't happen,
that doesn't mean that the whole strategy is, is
under negative selection. It's a evolution works on averages
, it works on average outcomes. Um And sometimes
the reason why we do something is really quite different
to the evolutionary reason that that behavior exists if that
makes sense. Yes, it makes perfect sense.
But in the book, you also talk about how
people tend to be uncharitable toward those who do good
deeds. So, I mean, why is that
then? Yeah. So that's another thing that I
always wanted to come to. So thanks for asking
that question. So one of the unusual things about
human psychology is that we don't just, we're not
stuck with observing behavior and having to assume that the
behaviors that we observe, that the intentions and the
outcomes are always perfectly aligned. So humans have this
very sort of sophisticated form of cognition that some psychological
theory of mind that allows us to look under the
hood. When we see somebody doing something, for
example, giving to charity, we can look under
the hood and we can, we can actually entertain
the possibility that the reason that someone's doing something might
be different to the reason that they, that they
are trying to signal. So for example, when
someone gives to charity, we we know that often
doing charitable acts can result in reputation benefits. And
so when we see someone doing a charitable thing,
we can also ask ourselves, well, is the
reason the person is giving to charity? Is it
because they want to help that beneficiary or is it
because they actually want to improve their own image or
their own appearance or how they look to other people
? And this kind of skepticism is a uniquely human
trait. I think it's one that we don't share
with any other nonhuman species and it actually can result
in some quite strange outcomes which is that often doing
good doesn't lead to looking good because people can be
suspicious of the reason why you're doing it. And
if we suspect that people are acting with these calculated
or self serving motives in mind, then we frequently
withhold reputation benefits. And we don't, um,
we don't afford that individual, the higher status that
you might normally expect to result from doing these charitable
things. And so in some ways, you can
then get into these counter cycles of individuals actually hiding
their altruistic behavior, for example, by donating anonymously
or, um, something like that so that they
don't invite this skepticism or this suspicion from other people
. There's actually a really lovely quote, um from
Oscar Wilde, which I think really sums it up
nicely, which is, it's something like the nicest
feeling in the world is to donate anonymously, but
have somebody else find out about it. And the
reason that it's the nicest feeling in the world,
it's because of course, if they think you're doing
it anonymously, then all the skepticism that results from
looking under the hood is vastly reduced because, uh
, the, you know, there's no, it
seems far less calculated when you do it sort of
anonymously. So, but taking into account all of
the benefits we might get from helping other people talking
from approximate level, perhaps just feeling good and ultimately
, perhaps even increasing our fitness. Can we say
that people are really altruistic or is helping behavior?
Ultimately selfish? I think on a proximate psychological level
, lots of what you would call helping behavior or
altruistic behavior is psychologically altruistic. It's, it's motivated
from a genuine desire to help other people or a
genuine enjoyment from, you know, doing the right
thing. And so I, and I think this
is where often I run into, um or I
get challenged by people because they think that you're trying
to take the altruism out of altruism in a way
by suggesting that um helping behavior can ultimately be explained
in terms of benefits to the helpful individual. People
will often mistakenly assume that that means that all helpful
behavior is performed in a calculated manner and with those
benefits in mind. And that's not at all what
an evolutionary perspective would say. So the evolutionary perspective
to, to allow us for the fact that helping
behavior can be psychologically pure can be very, very
genuinely altruistic with no real calculated um uh desire to
improve one's own position, supporting it. But that
doesn't change the fact that those, those psychological motives
, those proximate motives have probably been selected for because
ultimately in an evolutionary sense, performing helpful behaviors or
being co-operative is often the best way to ensure evolutionary
success. And so, yes, I think altruism
a lot of the time is uh can be understood
in terms of self interest. If what you mean
is the self interest, the gene's own selfish interest
. But I don't think that that means that all
altruism is knowingly or calculatedly selfish. So, could
you tell us about interdependence? Yeah. So I
think, I mean, I mentioned at the start
that I think this is sort of a a neglected
mechanism for supporting cooper operation relative to something like reciprocal
altruism. Um Interdependence is just the idea that you
have a stake in your partner's well being or fitness
more strictly speaking. Um I illustrate the idea of
interdependence in the book using a toy example, which
is imagine if you were in a rowing boat with
um one other person and the boat springs a leak
and the boat's filling up with water and you both
need to bail out the water to, you know
, in order for the boat not to sink.
Now, if you, if you were the kind
of uh prepared individual on the boat and you brought
one chocolate bar, but your friend didn't have a
chocolate bar with them, it could actually be in
your own interest to share that chocolate with your friend
to the extent that that allows them to keep on
bailing out the boat. If we assume that both
of you are needed to bail out the boat in
order to stop it sinking, then you suddenly become
really interdependent and it can be in your own best
interest to help your interdependent partner. Even if there's
no expectation of reciprocity at that time, simply because
your partner, your own survival or your own well
being is highly dependent on your partner's presence and your
partner's um being there. And so this is the
idea of interdependence and for many issues that live in
groups or that have stable social interactions or repeated social
interactions with the same individuals, it probably makes quite
a lot of sense to think about these interaction partners
as being interdependent rather than simply being to individuals that
w that support cooper operation through um a highly dogmatic
form of reciprocal altruism like tit for tat and the
difference between those two things is that in tit for
tat, it only benefits me to help you if
I think you're gonna help me in return. And
if I help you and you don't help me,
then I've just wasted my investment. If we're interdependent
, it can benefit me to help you even if
you don't help me in return. And I think
that that idea of it um unconditional helping within these
sort of established relationships is much more in line with
what we see in nature. And these relationships probably
are often much more interdependent than we have previously um
assumed. And and why do we care so much
about what other people think of us? Well,
for humans, I think that we are all very
, very sensitive to our image or our reputation.
And some of the reasons for that are that individuals
that gain a good reputation are often more likely to
be chosen as interaction partners. So if you in
experimental settings and also in real world settings, the
most generous individuals are often the people that um in
an experiment, people say they want to choose them
as a partner in real world scenarios, those often
occupy more central social network positions, they have more
social capital. Um And they're also more likely to
receive support themselves if they fall ill or if they
are unable to meet their needs. For whatever reason
, the individuals that have accrued, a good reputation
are more likely to receive help from others when they
need it. And I think there are uh this
um this sensitivity to reputation can be explained in terms
of our dependence on one another and our dependence on
our social connections to, to survive and to,
to meet our daily requirements. And for sure,
like the humans are massively concerned with our reputation and
we don't really see much evidence of that in any
other species apart from the cleaner fish um system that
I've worked on with red one Bahari. So I
tell you, a bit more about it. Yeah
. Yeah. Sure. I mean, I have
them on the show and we talked a little bit
about that. But yeah, please go ahead.
So it's kind of again, it's this idea of
the behavioral destination and the journey because cleaner fish do
show concern for reputation, but they do the cognitive
journey they take to exhibit this concern for reputation is
very different to the cognitive journey that humans use to
show concern for reputation. So briefly, um,
cleaner fish live on coral reefs and they offer a
cleaning service to their clients, which involves removing parasites
from the surface of the skin. But there's a
conflict between the cleaners and the clients because the cleaners
would actually prefer to eat living tissues, mucus and
scales um and not to eat the active parasites.
Now, some of the clients that a cleaner fish
interacts with have a large home range and that means
that they have access to multiple cleaning stations within their
home range and that means that they can afford to
be fussy. So if they, if they go
to a cleaning station and they arrive there and they
see something ending badly, they see the cleaner fish
being chased by the current clients or they see the
current clients swimming away very quickly, then the fussy
client will, can think, ok, I won't
stay here. I'll go some, I'll go to
this other place that I know about this other cleaning
station. Strangely enough, Cleaner Fish seem to be
aware when they're being watched by these, what we
call fussy or visitor clients. And they are actually
more cooper or they offer a better service to their
current clients when they're being watched by the fussy or
the visitor client. And this demonstrates a rudimentary concern
for reputation in clean official caring about what other individuals
think. And of course, in the cleaner fish
, the cognition that supports this is not the ability
to take perspective, to understand what the client is
thinking or to impute beliefs to the client or anything
like this. It can simply be learned through trial
and error that if I do, if I cheat
, then those kinds of clients always swim away.
So therefore, I won't, I'll X parasites and
um they learn through trial and error or through associative
learning what behaviors bring about the rewards that they're seeking
. And so it just again, it's this idea
of thinking about the same behaviors but different cognition supporting
those those same sort of behavioral outcomes. So at
the same time, we also have lots of social
comparison. I mean, we compare ourselves to others
a lot. And I would imagine that particularly in
circumstances where there's lots of inequality that would have negative
psychological impacts on people. So I, I mean
, in what way is the social comparison affect our
lives? Yeah. Again, it's a super interesting
question and I think it's one where there's not actually
, there's, there's, I wouldn't say there's a
consensus yet in the field as to whether social comparison
is uniquely human or not. So one way that
social comparison can manifest is as a concern for fairness
or disliking getting rewards that are less than what another
individual gets. Um And in the lab, you
can measure this by asking whether individuals will refuse a
reward if a partner gets something better. And this
can be a test of what we call inequity aversion
. Now, we know that young Children are usually
very averse to inequity and anyone who's spent any time
with a young child will have heard them shout.
Oh, that's not fair. And this kind of
tendency to appreciate what's fair and what's not fair comes
online at about four or five years old and Children
really start to be able to be sensitive to,
I'm getting one thing and you're getting four things and
that's not fair and they will actually refuse. They
will sacrifice their one sticker or their one sweet to
prevent the partner from getting more than them. When
people have done similar studies with nonhuman primates and with
other animals, the results are much more mixed.
And in my view, I don't think that the
evidence is very strong to suggest that other species have
a concern for fairness. And I think that many
of the results in this field are more consistent with
much simpler explanations of um of of the cognition that
supports rejecting unfair outcomes. For example, it can
be due to frustration at seeing something you want,
that you can't get or having your expectations violated.
Like you see that one individual gets four, but
you get one. And so you have it,
it's not necessarily a social comparison that we're seeing in
, in other species in the same way that we
, that we see in humans. Um And I
think this concern for fairness and this meritocratic psychology,
if you like this idea that things ought to be
fair. And that uh for example, if we
work together to achieve a joint outcome, then we
ought to share the spoils of that outcome where I
shouldn't just take everything for myself and leave you with
nothing, right? This, this is the kind
of um psychology and the kind of behavior that a
concern for fairness can support. And it's really a
point where we really see quite strong divergence between humans
and uh in particular chimpanzees where for example, even
human Children who work together to get a reward will
then voluntarily split that reward with the partner that they
worked to get the reward with. Whereas in chimpanzees
, if they, they will work together to get
a reward, if they have to, but you
never see the in the one individual then giving half
to the other one that helped it. If they
can monopolize the reward, they will monopolize it for
themselves. And so you can see how this non
meritocratic um principle could be a real impediment to collaboration
because in a way, what's the point of working
with you on a task? If we at the
end of it, you, I, you just
keep everything for yourself and I don't get anything.
And so I think this kind of psychology, this
c this concern for fairness which you call social comparison
is all part of the same thing. But it's
a really crucial foundation of our collaborative natures actually,
and our, our ability to work together to achieve
joint success and to motivate individuals to work together,
to achieve joint success. And I think that is
a real point of divergence between humans and the other
great apes. So talking about unfairness, this ability
, we have to join together and rebel against tyrannical
leaders, for example, is it uniquely human?
Do we also find it in other great apes,
for example? And if not, uh in what
ways does it allow for us to affect social structures
that we don't really find in other great apes?
I think among the apes, it's quite unique.
It's what Christopher Berm has called the reverse dominance hierarchy
where um individuals resist the actions of dominant or big
shot um individuals and instead they work together to prevent
any selfish minority from gaining an unfair advantage. Um
And this is part of what why human societies are
often described as being egalitarian. Unlike many of the
other great ape societies that are often much more hierarchical
, much more despotic and where an alpha male often
gets a great, much greater share of reproduction than
the other males in the group. How having said
that I don't think it's unique to humans because there
are, I mean, when we, as I
said, at the start, the reason why I
started the book by thinking about co-operation inside our bodies
is that I said that some of the common principles
that we saw in the evolution of co-operation to form
individuals, we would also see at different levels or
different scales of um evolution. And one of those
general principles is this idea of the collective pulling against
the might of any selfish entity that tries to gain
an unfair advantage. And one place where we see
that principle in action is actually inside our bodies where
all the genes form what has been called a parliament
of the genes where they, they all work to
together in some ways to prevent the actions of any
selfish genetic element or any selfish gene that tries to
over replicate itself relative to the others. They were
the the rest of the genome works together to prevent
any of those selfish entities from having their way and
from disrupting the um the the stability of the collective
in some social insect species. You see workers who
work together to collectively police the actions of any single
worker who tries to lay eggs in the society.
So sometimes worker ants or worker bees can lay under
fertilized eggs that will develop into males. But the
other workers in the society will often eat those eggs
, they'll cannibalize them. And that's called worker policing
. And again, you see the might of the
collective at work in holding the kind of the interests
of selfish entities, selfish genes, selfish individuals in
check. And so I actually think that that pattern
of the collective a bit like a tug of war
. The collective on one end of the rope pulling
against the in the individual selfish elements. On the
other end is a real common theme that we see
at all levels of life and the transitions to greater
complexity, the evolutionary transitions to greater complexity occur when
that collective is able to overwhelm the interests of the
selfish, uh the the the sort of selfish entities
. So we're reaching our time limit. So,
uh so let me just ask you one last question
with all of this in mind. I mean,
with what we know about the evolution of human cooper
operation and how it works? Is it possible for
us to foster uh large scale cooper operation? Like
for example, nowadays, we have issues to tackle
like climate change, which demand, I mean,
international Co Ordination. Is there something that you wrote
about in your book or uh somewhere else about human
cooper operation that we can use with that with that
goal in mind. So I think that many of
the massive global problems that we face today are problems
of failed co-operation and they are problems that require us
to co-operate at global scales. And it's not obvious
that this is something that we're especially good at.
So we're what one problem with global cooper operation in
a way is that it's constantly at risk of being
undermined by co-operation at lower levels and co-operation that's easier
to achieve. So, for example, um nepotism
and corruption and bribery are all forms of local co-operation
that are quite natural to us in some ways,
nepotism is helping us family corruption or things like that
or can be helping your friends. I mean,
these are forms of cooper operation and they are,
they come much more easily to us in some respects
than cooperating at a global scale with people that we
don't know that we might never meet. Um And
so I don't think it's a given that we will
necessarily be able to resolve the global challenges that we
face. And I certainly am not gonna sit here
and tell you that I have the answers. But
II, I also don't think, I don't think
it's totally out of our grasp to do it.
But I think it, it in it will involve
us learning how to co-operate at a scale that we've
never really before managed to do effectively. And so
I guess it's for me, I think it's still
really an open question how the human story really ends
and what, whether we managed to over climate disaster
and, and you know, o overcome future pandemics
that we're going to experience and things like this,
I think we can do it. Um But whether
we will do it, I think is up to
us. OK. So, uh the book is
again, the Social Instinct of cooper operation shaped the
world. Uh Where can people find you on the
internet? Um I am probably most easy to find
on Twitter where I my handle is at Nicola Rajani
. My full name, I have a website called
the Social Evolution and Behavior Lab and that's at UCL
University College London. And yeah, you can find
me there. OK. So it's been a real
pleasure to talk to you, Nicola. Thank you
for coming on the show. Thanks so much.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview.
Until the end. I would just like to ask
you if you can to please consider supporting the show
for it to keep running. You will find links
to my Patreon page and also to paypal in the
description box of this interview and amount even just$1
per month will already be a great help. Otherwise
, and if you like what I'm doing, please
share the interview. Leave a like and hit the
subscription button. The issue is brought to you by
N Lights learning and development. Done differently. Check
their website at N lights.com. And finally, I
would like to give a huge thank you to my
main patrons and papal supporters, Kenen Litzke and Blanchett
Bears and Las for S Fredericks Ricardo Vladimir Craig Healey
, Adam Kel Olaf, Alec Jonathan Wiesel Jacob Wipe
Matthew Whitten Bed, Arno Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Henri Alenius John Connors Paulina Baron Philip for Connolly Jerry
Mueller, Herbert Gins, Ruth Gervase Bo Wear M
Beger Goldstein. Then Dimetri Robert Windegger Ruin, ASIO
Arthur Kz Mark Nevs Colin Holbrook, Susan Pinker Thomas
Trumble, Bernard Seus Pablo, San Simon Columbus,
George Pina Phil Cavanagh, Cory Clark, Mark Blythe
Roberto Nws Mi Stormer Eric Neumann Samuel Andreev Diag nuns
, Bernard Eni, Alexander Dun Bauer, Amarie Hickson
, Fergal, Ken Evan Boden H Herzog John Ross
, Jonathan Libran Oslo Bullet, Nathan Lean Stanton T
Samuel Correa, Eric Ians, Mark Smith, Jw
Juan We Tom Hummel David Sloan Wilson, Yasa Desa
Rau Ivan Solo, Roma Roach, Dmitri Grigoriev,
Diego London, Correa, Tom Roth Jank Punter,
Adana Rosman Charlotte Bli Nicole Barbaro, Adam Hunt Palo
Stasi Nele Bach, Catherine and Patrick Tobin. All
Ortiz Guy Madison Gary G Elman. Jean liars L
A Adrian Yagi, Nick, Golden Paul Tolentino.
Jean Bobos, Jules Price Edward Hall. My producers
is our web, Jim Frank Luca stank, Ian
Gilligan, Sergio, Guan Lo and Tom Venning Curtis
Dixon Jean Linear Benedict Mueller, Vegi Sardo France and
Ian Bachan. And my executive producers, Michelle Rozsi
, Rosie Jim Spratt and Matthew Lavender. Thank you
for all.